Since taking office, my administration
has launched the most sweeping border
and immigration crackdown
in American history.
>> Immigrant rights groups again sounding
the alarm over what they say is an
intensifying violent crackdown across
Oregon.
>> Our immigrant community has been under
attack
>> in a way that we haven't seen, not at
this magnitude and not in this
chaotic way.
>> You can comply, you can go to court, you
can do the process and still get picked
up.
>> So many of our clients right now are
experiencing that fall of, but I don't
understand. I'm following all the rules.
Why did they detain me?
>> We had kind of understood that the
administration was going to move on
lawfully and use a lot of illegal
tactics to achieve this mass deportation
goal. It would be aggressive and the law
didn't really matter TO THEM.
>> WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE MOMENT TO ME,
LIKE PEOPLE TALK ABOUT LIKE, we got to
meet the moment, right? This is the
moment we've all been This is why I went
to law school, right? This is why you're
here at Law Lab.
>> This was the last case I had to report
for.
That one got shredded.
Attorney action shots.
My name is Stephen Manning. I am the
executive director for Innovation Law
Lab.
Here at Law Lab, our mission is to
promote and protect the rights and
prosperity of the immigrant refugee
community.
We say the best way to defend your
rights is to use them.
If we don't use them, they vanish.
In Oregon, we've worked really hard on
making lawyers available at no cost to
the community.
One of our biggest pushes was to be able
to get people's asylum applications on
file so they could move forward with
their process. So, standing up
workshops, asylum workshops, asylum
legal clinics.
We've also thought about like lawyers
need to go out into the community.
And so, we have this thing called the
Justice Bus.
So,
Justice Bus,
access to justice everywhere.
This actual vehicle that can go to
places that need lawyers on site.
So, this is a consultation space.
Consultation spaces, you can get people
in here. And then we have the canopy
that comes out on the side so that we
can also have like a
uh
a lobby space out there.
So, the physical bus, so this is our ski
bus
uh and our camper van. And we're like,
"Yeah, you know what? We This is where
this is where actually needed more than
us going skiing."
Kind of like a makeover.
Is it an extreme makeover?
Maybe.
Last year was like within the law.
Obviously, there would be disagreements
about what the law could mean or certain
interpretations, but that's normal. It
was a system that functioned.
>> Get on the ground.
>> But what's happening now, it's all
different.
>> I got rights to talk, bro.
>> You got no rights here.
>> I do.
>> brother.
>> Now, it's just about preserving the
shreds of democracy within the
immigration space that exists,
preventing people's expulsion back into
very dangerous places. So, the stakes
are just absolutely different.
>> Immigration enforcement raids are
initiated across Texas.
>> Growing tensions over mass deportations
in Los Angeles.
>> We saw the administration
um call in the National Guard on LA.
You know, immigration raids have not
happened here in Oregon, but
um certainly we have seen it just an
increase in attack on our immigrant
community.
Going to be speaking at this rally to
really condemn the actions of the
administration.
>> Hey, y'all.
>> I'm one of the speakers.
>> Hi. How are you? I'm Lee.
>> I'm Isa.
>> I work at Innovation Law Lab.
>> All right. I think I've heard of that.
>> We need Oregon leaders to ensure that
our state stands strong.
Let's protect the place we call home.
And if ICE wants to find out what the
Constitution means in Oregon, we will
not back down.
>> I come from a mixed status family. That
means there are people in my
immediate family that have citizenship.
There are people who have no documents.
The personal is always in in the work.
>> Whenever immigrant rights ARE UNDER
ATTACK, WHAT DO WE DO?
>> STAND UP, FIGHT BACK.
>> ICE DETAINED four people at the
courthouse who were seeking asylum.
>> Taken out of immigration court and into
custody.
>> This man was the last of four immigrants
taken into custody.
>> You know, we started to see this
practice where ICE attorneys would ask
judges to dismiss people's cases. The
judge would then dismiss the case and
there would be
ICE agents outside waiting to pick up
that person.
>> ICE is asking immigration judges across
the country to dismiss the court cases
of certain migrants so the agency can
arrest them once their hearings end and
place them in a fast-track deportation
process.
>> Usually it's a good thing if the
government drops charges against you.
But here, they're dismissing proceedings
in order to put you in a form of
proceedings where you have fewer rights
to actually speed up your deportation.
>> So far it's not happening here in
Portland.
>> Not yet.
>> We break. It's not yet. We've been So
we've They rolled it out, started
rolling it out last week. Phoenix, San
Diego, LA, Seattle.
So we were anticipating it starting
sometime this week. So we're just
preparing.
>> It violates the Constitution because
they did it without regard for anybody's
due process rights.
>> I think it's going to get really, really
bad and I think we're only at the
beginning of bad right now.
>> All right.
Court cases generate a lot of documents.
So our client, Yazeed L.H., is seeking
asylum in the United States. He went to
immigration court. He completely
followed all the rules.
Every single rule he has followed
in immigration court. They grabbed him.
they have power to do so.
But it still has to be lawful. Like
they've got to do it within the the
confines of the Constitution. The
government
did not do that at all in this case. In
YZLH, they
literally like grab him and let's go.
>> Would ask the court to find that
petitioner's parole grant of parole
under 8 USC 1182D5
has not expired of its own accord.
That two, the purpose of petitioner's
parole was to seek protection in the US.
>> You can combine these two if you want.
You can shorten your flight risk or
danger.
>> Stairs? Elevator?
>> Stairs.
It's disturbing how little has been a
surprise other than I'd say the speed
with which everything's happened.
>> Yeah.
And here, I think we're going to
see Mike.
Cuz we're going to move right into the
courthouse.
Did you see Did you see where you were
in there?
>> Oh, we have to tell me when you're
>> We won. But I got to go get him out. So,
I got to go
>> He's in Tacoma at the moment. We are
working as we speak to get him released
because the court has ordered his
release today. The judge issued a very
clear, unequivocal order from the bench
that he needs to be released today. That
he is he has been unlawfully detained
since June 5th and he needs to be
released today.
>> You did great.
You did great there. You did great here.
You killed it.
You won.
>> That's what you call justice.
He should never be detained in the first
place, right? But if that wrong happens,
there is a way to get a remedy. And it
gives me hope that that the system, our
judicial system, recognizes the illegal
illegality and will remedy it.
Um so I do have hope.
When we were researching, so we were
preparing our briefs, came across this
German lawyer who wrote this law review
article, Ernest Fraenkel.
He was practicing law during the rise of
the Nazis, so one of the few Jewish
lawyers who still had their license,
able to practice.
And he started writing about the dual
state.
Two states of being, right? So it's
And one he called the normative state.
Most people will spend most of their
lives in the normative state, right? So
like the law still exists here in the
US. Like we have our mortgage law and
our contract law. We all stop at stop
signs still.
But then there's this other place, this
sort of legal abyss that he talked
about, which is he called the
prerogative state.
Whatever the prerogative of the leader,
here the DHS administrators, right?
Whoever's in charge, whatever they say
becomes the law. So there is no law.
>> Do you ever watch Stranger Things?
Very much like Stranger Things. At any
moment in time you could get ripped from
the normal state into the prerogative
state.
Law exists only cuz we believe it
exists, right? It's like
we we have to get courts to believe that
there's still law and that they will
then enforce law.
>> Previously the US we'd had the rule of
law, which means all the laws apply. We
had that as this bedrock.
But that doesn't exist right now.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> So today we are going to be hosting a
press conference for Rigoberto Hernandez
Hernandez, a wildland firefighter that
was detained and arrested as he was
actively fighting the Bear Gulch fire in
Washington.
>> This video shows Customs and Border
Patrol agents moving in on crews working
the Bear Gulch fire in the Olympic
Peninsula. They lined them up and
started taking pictures of their IDs.
>> On August 27th, armed Border Patrol
agents, working with National Park
Rangers, illegally arrested Mr.
Hernandez. Mr. Hernandez invoked his
Fifth Amendment right to remain silent
and the federal agents arrested him
despite having no warrant or reasonable
suspicion.
If CBP can unlawfully detain someone in
secret without notice or access to
counsel,
then no one's due process rights are
safe.
>> This morning we got notice that the
attorneys for ICE
motioned to dismiss
their immigration proceedings and that
they're going to release him.
So we're going to drive over to Tacoma
to pick him up.
Honestly kind of shocked that it turned
around so quickly.
>> Does it feel weird
being in Oregon?
>> A little.
It was mainly like a mentality game.
So,
and I mean that as in, you know, you
wake up and it's on you how you take
about your day.
It's either you could dwell on your
situation
or
you just try to make the best out of it.
And that's what I did, you know.
There were some pretty
pretty good souls that I met in there,
you know, they were good people. I heard
their situations.
You know,
it's just what they do to immigrants.
>> All right, man.
All right, thank you for your help.
>> Yeah, you're welcome. We'll be talking
so
>> The days that we do get wins, those are
really good.
But then there's other days that
it's heartbreaking.
If we're able to get one person out of
detention,
it's worth it.
So, just just working for the one right
now.
>> Outrage growing among immigrant
advocates. They say more than 200 people
have been arrested in the last few weeks
just here in Oregon.
>> ICE and Border Patrol are recklessly and
violently targeting Oregonians on their
way to work.
>> Portland is burning to the ground. You
have agitators, insurrectionists. All
you have to do is look at the Look at
the television. Turn on your tel-
>> The Trump regime is like wants to punish
Oregon, wants to punish Portland, right?
And is And is, you know, calling it
war-ravaged. The detentions are more
violent, the arrests are more violent.
They're moving people really quickly,
faster than the lawyers can operate.
At the ICE facility here, there are
people who are detained inside who want
lawyers, and there are free lawyers
outside.
Um, but the government won't let the
people see the lawyers and won't let the
lawyers see the people.
That's not due process.
>> I'm an attorney. I'd like to get access.
>> So, this is
Kate, who's our lawyer.
And she's there.
She's like, "I got my papers. I'm the
lawyer. They're inside."
And there's all these guys up there with
the guns.
They're like, "Who are you? No, we're
closed."
>> Come back Monday, ma'am. We're closed.
>> And then they don't let her in.
So, we're going to dial in now. So, if
you've got audio, can you turn off the
audio?
>> We're asking the judge to, I don't know,
just like restore due process and return
to the status quo of the Fifth
Amendment.
And the court's now going to consider
what they're going to do and they're
going to act with some urgency.
Even if she rules against us, this case
still goes on. Like, we still have a um
this is just like the first stage of the
case.
>> We still do not have a decision on our
access to counsel case,
which we had hoped to have a decision
this morning.
>> Got the justice bus right outside the
window there. We're ready to go.
>> The judge scheduled another hearing. She
specifically wants more facts to
demonstrate the denials of access
before she grants the thing that we've
asked for. Almost simultaneously, we got
word that there's at least 31
individuals who were scooped up in a
whole series of warrantless arrests.
So, those simultaneous things are
happening right now.
This is very bad timing. Very bad
timing.
GOT A KEY, GOT A WALLET, GOT A LICENSE.
GUYS, it was really shitty day. We did a
lot of really great work.
Um
We're getting two people out. I didn't
sleep last night, by the way. I should
look.
>> Oh, Stephen. AND WE GOT SOMEONE OUT
EARLIER this week that we totally forgot
about because we were consumed by this
yesterday, so.
>> We got someone out too.
>> Three people released this week. So,
there's a press conference today. Our
attorneys from Innovation Law Lab were
able to swiftly reach and file habeas
petition for five of those detained.
This is what due process looks like when
attorneys can access their clients. If
everyone who I snatched from our
community were allowed to meet with
their with an attorney, how many more
families would be whole tonight?
I think the
level of violence and the level of just
sweeps that are happening, I think is
just another level that we have not seen
um in decades.
People don't go to get gas anymore as
regularly or they're sending other
friends to get gas for them because
they're afraid of
getting pulled over.
Just like trying to bandage our way
through and try to protect as many
people as we can.
Just getting our little hearing room
ready.
>> Please enter the PIN followed by the
pound key.
>> We brought a lot of evidence to that
case.
Lawyers testified,
community members testified, impacted
individuals testified via data, all
kinds of evidence.
And I was astounded by the closing
argument by the government lawyer.
It had two pieces to it. One was thank
these people who are out there every day
risking their lives to deport people.
And the second piece is that the whole
purpose of this case is to leverage the
machinery of the judiciary to prevent
the deportations.
Which is exactly what the case is about.
That's called the Fifth Amendment. It's
like that is the love that is the
machinery of the judiciary.
That closing argument to me was these
men who are forcing this immigration
law, they are above the law.
His closing
>> It's not a strategy to the judge. It's a
strategy for the Ninth Circuit judges
who they're going to like appeal this to
and the strategy for their press release
they're going to issue about, you know,
radical Oregonians.
>> So now, Judge Aiken has told us that
she's taking under advisement, which
means she is going to go back and think
about it.
I don't know that we will get a decision
before
the new year.
So now we wait.
>> Decision could come at any time. So I
keep checking um check I check multiple
times to see each day.
There's a a level of fear that you I
mean that look at the building it's like
you step in and you might not step out.
Everyone who's going in is being
negatively impacted
by the fact that we don't have a
decision in that case.
>> I'm waiting for Rigo to come in through
security and then we're going to go try
to meet a senator real quick.
>> Anyway.
>> How you feeling ready?
Scared, nervous?
>> I don't know. I'm nervous, but
>> You're going to do great.
>> I was fighting a wildland fire in the
Olympic Peninsula
when I was arrested by border patrol.
I am an Oregonian and I'm grateful that
this program existed so that my
attorneys could fight my unlawful
detention. I know I'm just one of many
Oregonians who have been targeted by
unlawful arrest and I'm here because
we all need to be able to access an
attorney at some of the most critical
moments in our life.
>> We heard stories from Rigoberto, many
other individuals who have been
detained.
>> When you bring people who are directly
impacted by what's going on, it grounds
you, it brings everything to to what
we're really about and why we do the
work that we do.
>> People were able to hear our voice.
>> The work that we've done here at Law Lab
has slowed the mass deportation regime
and has broken some of the cogs that are
necessary to run that machine.
We've used the courts to free people
from unlawful detention.
And decisions across the country have
said people are not subject to this
mandatory detention.
Um that the government's just
interpreting the law wrong.
I'm hopeful about a lot of the cases
that we've brought. I'm hopeful in the
resilience of the people we represent. I
am hopeful in the stamina and the
courage of the people that work at Law
Lab.
I'm hopeful in those things.
>> Oh.